# Benefits

Transit benefits enrollment, minus the paperwork.

View the technical documentation online: <https://docs.calitp.org/benefits>

## Development

This repository uses [`pre-commit`][pre-commit] hooks to check and format code.

Ensure you have `pre-commit` installed:

```console
pip install pre-commit
```

Then run (from the root of this repository):

```console
bin/pre-commit.sh
```

### VS Code with Dev Containers

**This is the recommended development setup**.

[VS Code][vscode] can be used together with Docker via the [Remote - Containers][vscode-containers] extension to enable a
container-based development environment. This repository includes a [`.devcontainer.json`][config-file] file that configures
remote container development and debugging.

With the [Remote - Containers][vscode-containers] extension enabled, open the folder containing this repository inside Visual
Studio Code.

You should receive a prompt in the Visual Studio Code window; click `Reopen in Container` to run the development environment
inside a container.

If you do not receive a prompt, or when you feel like starting from a fresh environment:

1. `Ctrl+Shift+P` to bring up the command palette in Visual Studio Code
1. Type `Remote-Containers` to filter the commands
1. Select `Rebuild and Reopen in Container`

Once running inside a container, press **`F5`** to attach a debugger to the client at `http://localhost:${DJANGO_LOCAL_PORT}`
(<http://localhost:8000> by default) on your host machine.

The test eligibility verification server endpoint is running at `http://localhost:5000/verify` on your host machine.
Access the server endpoint from within the Dev Container at `http://server:5000/verify`.

`pre-commit` hooks are also installed and activated within the Dev Container.

To close out of the container and re-open the directory locally in Visual Studio Code:

1. `Ctrl+Shift+P` to bring up the command palette in Visual Studio Code
1. Type `Remote-Containers` to filter the commands
1. Select `Reopen Locally`

## Token signing and encryption

The Eligiblity Verification API makes use of Signed and Encrypted JSON Web Tokens (JWS, JWE, JWT) as a means of data transfer.

A public/private keypair must be generated by each party (Benefits Client and Eligibility Verification Server). [Example keys](./keys)
are included for the test verification server and sample agencies.

## Deployment

The application is deployed to AWS Elastic Container Service (ECS) using settings provided in the
[Task Definition template][ecs-task-definition].

A [GitHub Action](.github/workflows/deploy-ecs.yml) performs the following steps on pushes to `main`:

1. Login to Elastic Container Registry (ECR) using AWS credentials stored in repository secrets
1. Build and push a new image using the repository's `Dockerfile`, saving the image tag as output
1. Using the Task Definition template, fill in the newly built image tag
1. Push the new Task Definition to ECS, triggering a re-deploy

### Configuration data

The production configuration data (a version of [data/client.json](./data/client.json)) is stored in an AWS S3 bucket.

The [Task Definition template][ecs-task-definition] includes a container definition that uses the AWS CLI
Docker image to pull this config file from S3 during the bootup sequence, storing it in a volume that is mounted into the main
application container.

To replicate the production configuration locally, fill in the appropriate values for AWS configuration in the `.env` file and
then run:

```console
docker-compose run s3config
```

[config-file]: ./.devcontainer.json
[ecs-task-definition]: ./.aws/ecs-task-definition.json
[vscode]: https://code.visualstudio.com/
[pre-commit]: https://pre-commit.com/
[vscode-containers]: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers
