# Migrations and fixtures

!!! tldr "Django docs"

    - [Migrations](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/migrations/)
    - [Data migrations](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/migrations/#data-migrations)
    - [Fixtures](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/db/fixtures/)

When models are updated, new migrations must be generated to reflect those changes in the database schema.
A data migration and fixture update may also be needed, depending on the nature of the model changes.

## Schema migrations

A simple helper script exists to generate migrations based on the current state of models in the local codebase:

[`bin/makemigrations.sh`](https://github.com/cal-itp/benefits/blob/main/bin/makemigrations.sh)

```bash
bin/makemigrations.sh
```

This script:

1. Runs the standard Django `makemigrations` command
1. Formats the newly regenerated migration file with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)

Commit the new migration file along with the model changes.

## Data migrations

!!! warning

    If your schema changes affect any model fields that currently hold data,
    you probably need to also write a data migration to ensure that existing data is not lost.

Our preferred way of handling data migrations is to add a `migrate_data` function
to the file that was already generated for the schema migration,
and add a `RunPython` operation to the list of `operations` to call it.

Here is a simple example of the resulting file after combining schema and data migrations,
with the additions for data migration highlighted:

```python hl_lines="6-12 29"
# Generated by Django 5.2.7 on 2026-02-03 22:25

from django.db import migrations, models


def migrate_data(apps, schema_editor):
    TransitProcessorConfig = apps.get_model("core", "TransitProcessorConfig")

    for config in TransitProcessorConfig.objects.all():
        if config.environment == "qa":
            config.environment = "test"
        config.save()


class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        ("core", "0073_add_roseville"),
    ]

    operations = [
        migrations.AlterField(
            model_name="transitprocessorconfig",
            name="environment",
            field=models.TextField(
                choices=[("dev", "Development"), ("test", "Testing"), ("prod", "Production")],
                help_text="A label to indicate which environment this configuration is for.",
            ),
        ),
        migrations.RunPython(migrate_data),
    ]
```

In the above example, the schema change was to change the choice value `qa` to `test`,
so the `migrate_data` function looks for existing `TransitProcessorConfig`s with values of `qa`
and updates them to `test`.

In some cases, more complex data migrations may warrant more than just a single `migrate_data` function.

!!! note

    We do not generally worry about making **reversible** data migrations.
    We have enough checks and balances that we are comfortable with just moving forward.

We also prefer to combine all migrations (schema and data) pertinent to a single PR into one file,
even if the changes are broken out across multiple commits for easier reviewing.
Migrations added in later commits can simply be added to the first migration that was created on the branch.

## Updating fixtures

Aside from migrating the database schema and possibly existing data,
our fixture files which are used for development will also need to be updated.

In addition to the `local_fixtures.json` file that is checked into the repository,
we maintain private fixture files with working values for external integrations
that are not included in the sample fixtures in `local_fixtures.json`.

An easy way to update these fixture files is to run them through the migrations that were created.
The steps in general are:

_(from within the devcontainer)_

1. Download the fixtures that you need to update (if updating the fixtures with secrets)
1. Set your `DJANGO_DB_FIXTURES` environment variable to that file
   - There are many ways to do this. Here is one way:
     1. Update the value of `DJANGO_DB_FIXTURES` in your `.env` file
     1. Run `source .env`
     1. Check the value with `echo $DJANGO_DB_FIXTURES`
1. Checkout the commit on `main` prior to the model changes (i.e. where the fixtures can be loaded in)
1. Run `./bin/setup.sh` to reset your database and load in the fixtures
1. Checkout the commit with the new model changes (most likely, the latest commit on `main`)
1. Run `python manage.py migrate` to apply migrations
1. Export the migrated fixtures to a temporary file
1. Review the migrated fixtures, and do any clean-up or manual updating needed
   (though generally we should be able to have data migrations that make it so no manual updating is needed)
1. Save the updated fixtures back where they belong

A helper script at [`bin/dumpdata.sh`](https://github.com/cal-itp/benefits/blob/main/bin/dumpdata.sh)
handles some of these steps, prompting where input is needed, so the steps are simplified down to:

1. Download the fixtures that you need to update (if updating the fixtures with secrets)
1. Set your `DJANGO_DB_FIXTURES` environment variable to that file
1. Run `./bin/dumpdata.sh`
1. Review the migrated fixtures in `unreviewed_fixtures.json`, and do any clean-up or manual updating needed
   (though generally we should be able to have data migrations that make it so no manual updating is needed)
1. Save the updated fixtures back where they belong
